.Dd Aug 17 2024
.Dt jcreate 7
.Os
.Au John Kaul
.Pp
.Sh NAME
.Nm jcreate 
.Nd a program to create jail.conf type jails.
.Pp
.Sh SYNOPSIS
jcreate [-n] template.conf
.Pp
jdestroy jail_name
.Pp
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl n
dry-run (A jail.conf file is constructed and printed to STDOUT,
based on <template.conf>, for review. A jail is NOT
constructed).
.It template.conf
A configuration file that contains the required variables defined
below.
.El
.Pp
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This script will set up a jail (extract userland, copy in directories, run setup scripts, and install packages) and create a `<jailname>.conf` jail configuration file in `/etc/jail.conf.d/` based on a config file which contains the jail name, epairid, mount points, packages to install, and setup scripts.
.Pp
The userland extraction step is skipped if the jail container already exists, which aids in jail maintenance and/or use of thin jails.
.Pp
Packages can either be installed from the host system (via the `jail.packages` variable/file) or from within the `jail.config` script itself (via the standard FreeBSD `pkg install` method).
.Pp
Mount points--specified in the `jail.mounts` variable/file--within the jail are added to the `<jailname>.conf` file.  It is assumed that the setup script will create the necessary directories to support the mounts.
.Pp
.Sh JAIL TEMPLATE CONFIGURATION
Variables are marked as REQUIRED or OPTIONAL.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It jail.name
.Em REQUIRED
: The name of the jail
.Pp
.It jail.epairid
.Em REQUIRED
: This is the last few digits of the jails IP address.
.Pp
.It jail.packages
.Em OPTIONAL
: A file with a list of packages to be installed from the host system. The file should contain a package one per line.
.Pp
.It jail.mounts
.Em OPTIONAL
: The file which contains the mount locations. These mounts get added to to the `<jailname>.conf` file in the `/etc/jail.conf.d/` directory.
.Pp
.It jail.config
.Em OPTIONAL
: A configuration script or a file with a list of scripts to be copied into the jail and executed. A file with a list of scripts should contain one script per line (commented lines with a hash [#] are ignored).
.Pp
A file with multiple scripts should allow for a few different maintenance/setup scenarios:
.Pp
1. Any user setup or sensitive scripts (with passwords, etc) can be kept in a separate script, loaded, launched and deleted. -E.G., do_some_stuff ... rm "$(readlink -f "$0")".
.Pp
2. Package configurations can be kept in separate scripts–for easier maintenance (or whatever reason)–and loaded separately and run in a specific order -e.g. “database.sh”, “serversetup.sh”, “appsetup.sh”.
.Pp
.It jail.copyin
.Em OPTIONAL
: Files to copy in relative to the jail's `/usr` directory.
.Pp
.It jail.mlock=1
.Em OPTIONAL
: Allow jail to mlock.
.Pp
.It jail.systemv=1
.Em OPTIONAL
: Allow all three `sysvmsg`, `sysvsem`, and `sysvshm` options.
.Pp
.It jail.sysvmsg=new
.Em OPTIONAL
: Allow access to SYSV IPC message primitives.  If set to “inherit”, all IPC objects on the system are visible to this jail, whether they were created by the jail itself, the base system, or other jails.  If set to “new”, the jail will have its own key namespace, and can only see the objects that it has created; the system (or parent jail) has access to the jail's objects, but not to its keys.  If set to “disable”, the jail cannot perform any sysvmsg-related system calls.
.Pp
.It jail.sysvsem=new
.Em OPTIONAL
: Allow access to SYSV IPC semaphore and shared memory primitives, in the same manner as sysvmsg.
.Pp
.It jail.sysvshm=new
.Em OPTIONAL
: Allow access to SYSV IPC semaphore and shared memory primitives, in the same manner as sysvmsg.
.Pp
.It jail.poststart
.Em OPTIONAL
: Command(s) to run in the system environment after a jail is created, and after any exec.start commands have completed.
.Pp
.It jail.prestop
.Em OPTIONAL
: Command(s) to run in the system environment before a jail is removed.
.Pp
.It host.config
.Em OPTIONAL
: The script or command to run on the host after the jail is created. This can be used, for example, to set meta data in the jail.conf file or call a script to execute.
.Pp
.It media.path
.Em OPTIONAL
: Override the `media.path` variable found in the `jcreate.conf` file. This override allows for the use of a per-jail-template-system so it is possible to have custom base images for different jail types (e.g. "media", "service", "developer", etc. type base images).
.Pp
.El
.Pp
.Sh TEMPLATE CONFIGURATION
.Em Example
template.conf:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    /* mytemplate.conf --
     *    This configuration will create a jail with the following
     *    properties.
     *     name:   mytemplate
     *     IP:     192.168.0.64
     */
    config {
       jail.name=mytemplate
       jail.epairid=64
       jail.mounts=mounts
       jail.packages=packages
       jail.confg=setup.sh
    }
.Ed
.Pp
.Em Example
mounts file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    /* mounts --
     *    These are the mount directories for
     *    the `mytemplate` jail.
     */
    mount += "hostdir1 $path/jaildir1 nulfs 0 0";
    mount += "hostdir2 $path/jaildir2 nulfs 0 0";
.Ed
.Pp
.Em Example
packages file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    /* packaes --
     *    These are the packages to install for
     *    the `mytemplate` jail */
    git-tiny
    vim
    # perl5
    vifm
    mdnsresponder
.Ed
.Em NOTE
The `perl5` package is commented out and thus will not be installed.
.Pp
.Em Example
setup.sh:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    # Create/touch /etc/rc.conf file.
    touch /etc/rc.conf
.Pp
    # Disable sendmail.
    service sendmail onedisable || true
.Pp
    # Create /usr/local/etc/rc.d directory.
    mkdir -p /usr/local/etc/rc.d
.Pp
    #
    # CRON
    cat <<_EOF_ >>/etc/crontab
    #
    # Issue a `pkg upgrade` hourly.
    @hourly	root	pkg upgrade -y && pkg update
    _EOF_
.Pp
    #
    # SSHD
    cat <<_EOF_ >>/etc/ssh/sshd_config
    Protocol 2
    HostKey /etc/ssh/ssh_host_ed25519_key
.Pp
    PermitRootLogin no     # Off by default but put here as a reminder/flag.
    StrictModes yes
.Pp
    PasswordAuthentication no
    ChallengeResponseAuthentication no
    PubkeyAuthentication yes
.Pp
    IgnoreUserKnownHosts no
    ## Don't read the user's ~/.rhosts and ~/.shosts files
    IgnoreRhosts yes
.Pp
    ## override default of no subsystems
    Subsystem	sftp	/usr/libexec/sftp-server
.Pp
    AllowUsers admin
    _EOF_
.Pp
    sysrc sshd_enable="YES"
    service sshd enable || true
.Pp
    /usr/bin/ssh-keygen -A                 # Generate all keys.
.Pp
    service sshd start || true
    service sshd restart || true
.Pp
    #
    # ADMIN USER
    #   user: admin
    #   pass: admin
    pw user add -n admin -d /home/admin -G wheel -m -s /bin/csh -w yes
    chmod 754 /home/admin
.Ed
.Pp
.Sh COMMENTS
Configuraation files can contain comments in the common C, and shell format.
.Pp
.Em Example
File comments:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    /* This is a C style comment.
     * It may span multiple lines.
     */
.Pp
    #  This is a shell style comment.
.Ed
.Pp
Comments are legal wherever whitespace is allowed, -i.e. anywhere EXCEPT in the middle of a string or a token.
.Pp
.Pp
.Sh JCREATE CONFIGURATION
The default `jcreate.conf` confuration file should contain the following variables.
.Pp
.El
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It media.path
_REQUIRED_
: A location to where the userland.
.Pp
.It containers.path
_REQUIRED_
: A location where to extract the userland (where the jail will reside)
.Pp
.It containers.conf
_REQUIRED_
: A location where to keep the jail configuration files (EX: /etc/jail.conf.d)
.Pp
.El
.Pp
.Em Example
jcreate.conf:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    config {
        media.path=/usr/local/jails/media/14.1-RELEASE-base.txz
        containers.path=/usr/local/jails/containers
        containers.conf=/etc/jail.conf.d
    }
.Ed
.Pp
.Pp
.Sh LOCATIONS
The locations to where the programs are installed.
.It jcreate/jdestroy:
/usr/local/bin
.Pp
.It jcreate.conf:
/usr/local/etc
.El
.Pp
.Sh USERLAND DOWNLOAD
.Em From the FreeBSD Handbook
.Pp
To get started creating jails in FreeBSD 14 we need first download the userland for the release you want the jail to have. The instructions to download the userland can be found in the FreeBSD handbook (copied here for convience).
.Pp
In principle, a jail only needs a hostname, a root directory, an IP address, and a userland. The userland for the jail can be obtained from the official FreeBSD download servers. Execute the following command to download the userland
.Bd -literal -offset indent
  # fetch https://download.freebsd.org/ftp/releases/amd64/amd64/14.1-RELEASE/base.txz -o /usr/local/jails/media/14.1-RELEASE-base.txz
.Ed
.Pp
.Pp
.Sh BASIC JAIL CONFIGURATION
The next step is to create a common `jail.conf` file in `/etc/` that will be used by all jail configurations in `/etc/jail.conf.d/`. The last line in the `/etc/jail.conf` file contains an `include` directive for all `<jailname>.conf` files found in the `/etc/jail.conf.d` directory.
.Pp
The `/etc/jail.conf` file should look something like (your needs may very slightly):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    # DEFAULT OPTIONS
    # (COMMON TO ALL JAILS)
.Pp
    # STARTUP/LOGGING
    exec.start = "/bin/sh /etc/rc";
    exec.stop  = "/bin/sh /etc/rc.shutdown";
    exec.consolelog = "/var/log/jail_console_${name}.log";
.Pp
    # PERMISSIONS
    allow.raw_sockets;
    exec.clean;
    mount.devfs;
    devfs_ruleset = 5;
.Pp
    # PATH/HOSTNAME
    path = "/usr/local/jails/containers/${name}";
    host.hostname = "${name}";
.Pp
    # VNET/VIMAGE
    vnet;
    vnet.interface = "${epair}b";
.Pp
    # NETWORKS/INTERFACES
    $ip             =   "192.168.0.${id}/24";
    $epair          =   "epair${id}";
    $gateway        =   "192.168.0.1";
    $bridge         =   "bridge0";
.Pp
    # ADD TO bridge INTERFACE
    exec.prestart   =   "/sbin/ifconfig ${epair} create up";
    exec.prestart   +=  "/sbin/ifconfig ${epair}a up descr jail:${name}";
    exec.prestart   +=  "/sbin/ifconfig ${bridge} addm ${epair}a up";
    exec.start      +=  "/sbin/ifconfig ${epair}b ${ip} up";
    exec.start      +=  "/sbin/route add default ${gateway}";
    exec.poststop   =   "/sbin/ifconfig ${bridge} deletem ${epair}a";
    exec.poststop   +=  "/sbin/ifconfig ${epair}a destroy";
.Pp
    .include "/etc/jail.conf.d/*.conf";
.Ed
.Pp
.Pp
.Sh EXAMPLE USAGE
To create a jail from the example "mytemplate" jail configuration above:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    $ doas jcreate /location/to/jail/templates/mytemplate.conf
.Ed
.Pp
To destroy a jail (delete the userland container and the `/etc/jail.conf.d/mytemplate.conf` file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    $ doas jdestroy mytemplate
.Ed
.Pp
.Em NOTE
To create a custom userland which could simplify configurations for all other jail setups, a simple configuration can be made which only sets basic settings (like: adding files to /usr/local/skel, setting up SSH, or installing mDNSResponder, etc.) then navigate to zroot/jail/media (or /usr/local/jails/media) and tar up the configured jail for use as a base userland.
.Pp
Create a simple template called 'base' with all the packages, and setup configurations.
.Pp
Then:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
  # jcreate /path/to/templates/base/base.conf
  # service jail start base
  # jexec base
  ... configure 'base' jail ...
  # service jail stop base
  # cd /usr/local/jails/media
  # chflags -R 0 /usr/local/jails/containers/base
  # tar -cJf userland.txz -C /usr/local/jail/containers/base/ .
  # jdestroy base
.Ed
.Pp
Configure the jcreate.conf to point to the newly created userland base
.Pp
.Pp
.Sh EXIT
Exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error occurs.
.Pp
.Sh HISTORY
Created for my personal use.
.Pp
.Pp
.Sh AUTHOR
John Kaul (john.kaul@outlook.com)
outlook.com)
.com)
